Salaam Namaste

I used to buy books for the Bangalore slum schools we supported from Sheikh Mohammed’s tiny shop. He had a shop selling stationery near our office and we would buy the books in bulk from him. We would pick up the books from the shop and let him know when the cheque was ready. He would then come to the office and collect it.
Once, when he came to the office to get his cheque, we were celebrating something and sweets were being handed out to everyone. Sheikh was offered some as well. He took a couple and put them away carefully in his pocket.
Seeing him do that, I asked, ‘What’s the matter, Sheikh? Why aren’t you eating the sweets? Are you a diabetic?’
Sheikh was a shy, taciturn man and I knew little about him and his family, so I was pleasantly surprised to hear his explanation: ‘No, madam. I’m going to take them home and give them to the kids. They love these sweets.’
‘How many children do you have?’ I had noticed he had picked up only a couple of pieces.
‘I have one daughter, but my niece also stays with us, so there are two children in the house.’
‘Why does your niece stay with you?’
‘She is my sister Zubeida’s daughter. She is a widow and both stay with us.’
I realized it must be tough for Sheikh to manage a fairly large household with only the income from his little shop. So I asked, ‘Does Zubeida work?’
‘Yes, she is a very good tailor. She and my wife do tailoring at home. With their income and the money I earn from the shop we get by quite well. We are
 
contented.’
I was touched by his story. ‘Contented’ is a word rarely heard these days. A few months passed and one day I suddenly got a call from Sheikh. He wanted me to give him his cheque a few days earlier than usual. ‘Why, Sheikh? Is anything the matter?’ I asked.
‘Yes, madam. We discovered some time back that Zubeida is suffering from cancer. The operation is tomorrow and we need the money desperately.’
I instructed the cheque be sent to him immediately, but I also realized that it would probably not be enough. Such operations are expensive and I was sure he was struggling to raise the money. Yet he had asked me only for what was due to him and nothing more.
I have learnt many lessons in life ever since we started helping people monetarily through the Infosys Foundation. I have seen women hiding their diamond studs in their purses and asking for funds for the poor. I have seen well- off parents declaring their children orphans and applying for scholarships. I even know some men who presented their parents as destitutes so they could get help from us.
I called up Sheikh. ‘Sheikh, tell me, have you managed to get all the money you need for the operation?’
‘I have sold all of Zubeida’s and my wife’s jewellery. I have also taken a loan from the bank.’
‘Sheikh, why didn’t you ask us?’
‘Madam, at least I can afford this much. You should be helping those who are poorer and cannot even afford this. They require your help more than I do.’
I was touched. I asked him to get the papers and meet me as quickly as he could. He came the next morning and showed me all the documents. I took a look and handed him a cheque for fifty thousand rupees.
Surprised and hesitant, he said, ‘This is a lot of money. I never expected such help to come from the blue. May you be blessed forever.’
A few days passed and Sheikh sent a message saying the operation had gone well. For a long time after that we did not hear anything from him. Then one day as I walked into the office I found him sitting in the reception, a little girl of about four by his side. She was wearing an ordinary cotton dress decorated with laces and buttons. Her hair, neatly oiled, was pulled up into a ponytail.
‘How are you, Sheikh?’ I asked him. ‘How is Zubeida?’
 
Sheikh’s face was lined with grief. ‘Zubeida passed away a fortnight back. In spite of all our efforts and your help she did not survive. It was Allah’s wish. I wanted you to meet her daughter Tabassum.’
I looked at Tabassum. She was scared and ill at ease in this strange office where people bustled about busily. Just to make her feel comfortable, I offered her some biscuits. She took one and then asked me in a shy voice, ‘Can I take another one? For Ameena?’
Ameena was her cousin. I smiled and said, ‘Of course.’ I looked sadly at the girl, orphaned so young. Then her uncle said, ‘Beti, Ammi ne bola than na? Inko salaam karo.’ Putting down the biscuits, the little girl said in a clear voice, ‘Madam, Ammi ka salaam.’
I was at a loss for words. Sheikh wiped his tears and pulled out an envelope from his bag. He handed it to me saying, ‘This is yours. I am sorry, I am a bit late with this.’
I opened it. There were three thousand rupees in it. I looked at Sheikh in confusion. ‘Out of the fifty thousand you gave us, we used only forty-seven thousand for Zubeida’s treatment. When we came home and she knew she was dying, Zubeida made me promise that I would return the remaining money to you. “Don’t waste this on me,” she said. “Tell madam to give it to some other sick person.” She had wanted so much to meet you and give you her salaam, but Allah took her away. I promised her I would carry out this last wish.’
I sat there in stunned silence. I had never met Zubeida, but the largeness of her heart even on her deathbed left me speechless. In spite of her own pain and poverty, she had thought about someone who might be in greater need of help.
Her story was a lesson in compassion. She wanted to thank me, and when she knew she would not make it, she sent her daughter. Through the act of sending Tabassum she was perhaps passing on her positive attitude to the child. I was sure Tabassum would grow up to be a fine human being. I looked at the envelope. ‘This is for Tabassum. May Allah be kind to her. Let her study well. If you need any more help for her, let me know. And always tell her about her mother. Our earth is enriched by people like Zubeida.’
Tabassum sat quietly, her big eyes puzzled. One day she would understand and perhaps emulate her mother’s courage.
